Near the ancient Indian kingdom of Mahishmati, an injured woman named Sivagami exits a cave underneath a mountain waterfall, carrying an infant. She kills two soldiers pursuing her and attempts to cross a raging river, but slips and is washed away in the current. Before drowning, she holds the baby aloft and prays to Lord Shiva, explaining that she doesn't care about her life and wishes that the baby, Mahendra Baahubali must live. The child is saved by the people of the local Amburi tribe, who reside near the river and worship Lord Shiva. The wife of the tribe's chieftain, Sanga, decides to adopt the boy and names him Sivudu.

Sivudu grows up to be an ambitious and mischievous child, obsessed with ascending the mountain. Despite Sanga's pleas, he tries many times to scale the cliffs but always fails. As a young man, he is shown to possess superhuman strength when he lifts a Lingam of Lord Siva and places it at the foot of the mountain. A mask then falls from the cliffs, and realizing it possesses feminine features, Sivudu finally succeeds in scaling the mountain in order to find the woman the mask belongs. Upon reaching the top, he sees a beautiful woman named Avantika fighting Mahishmati soldiers. He discovers that she is a member of a local resistance group dedicated to overthrowing the tyrannical king of Mahishmati, Lord Bhallaladeva, and rescuing royal captive Princess Devasena. Sivudu is immediately smitten with Avantika and secretly follows her, even managing to draw a tattoo on her hand while she sleeps. When she discovers Sivudu she attacks him, but he outmaneuvers her and returns her mask. Realizing he scaled the entire mountain to find her, she reciprocates his feelings and later they have sex.

After she quietly faints Sivudu and leaves, she gets attacked by more soldiers. After Sivudu joins in, the pair are later attacked by more soldiers, and after defeating them, Sivudu pledges to rescue Devasena himself and departs for Mahishmati. He secretly enters the city on Bhallaladeva’s birthday and assists in erecting a gigantic statue of the king. In the process, he is recognized by a worker, who then leads the other workers in chanting 'Baahubali,' to Sivudu's confusion and Bhallaladeva's displeasure. Sivudu later infiltrates the royal palace disguised as a soldier and distracts Bhallaladeva and his guards long enough for him to rescue Devasena. Bhallaladeva sends his son, Bhadra, and the royal family's loyal slave Kattappa to recapture Devasena. In the ensuing fight, Sivudu beheads Bhadra as both the Amburi tribe and resistance warriors arrive. Kattappa lunges at Sivudu, but stops short of attacking him upon seeing his face. He falls into submission at Sivudu's feet, proclaiming him to be "Baahubali".

The next morning, Kattappa reveals to Sivudu that Sivudu is actually Mahendra Baahubali, the son of Amarendra Baahubali, a famous warrior prince from Mahishmati. Amarendra Baahubali was born an orphan; his father, King Vikramadeva, died before he was born and his mother died giving birth to him. Lord Bijjaladeva, Vikramadeva's brother and the next in line for the throne, is denied the position due to his scheming nature, and as such Bijjaladeva's wife, Lady Sivagami, assumes power with the intention of raising both her son Bhallaladeva and the orphaned Baahubali in an equal manner to select the next heir to the throne. While the two are raised as brothers and trained rigorously in numerous subjects, Bhallaladeva retains the power-hungry nature of his father while the affable Baahubali becomes beloved by the kingdom.

A traitor named Saketudu turns out to be a spy for the savage Kaalakeya tribe, known as destroyers of kingdoms. Their chief Inkoshi declares war on Mahishmati, and Sivagami decides that whoever kills Inkoshi will be crowned king. Bijjaladeva secretly supplies Bhallaladeva with more weapons and men, but Baahubali still defeats more raiders than Bhallaladeva by using innovative tactics and by inspiring his soldiers. While Bhallaaladeva kills Inkoshi, Baahubali's valour and concern for the people of his kingdom convinces Sivagami to make Baahubali heir apparent.

In the present day, Sivudu's adoptive parents, impressed by Kattappa's story, wish to meet Baahubali. A dejected Kattappa explains that Amarendra Baahubali is dead, and upon being questioned by Sivudu, he reveals that the traitor who murdered Baahubali was none other than him, setting a path for a sequel. Kattapa is revealed to be the side companion of Mahendra's father.

Kattappa continues to narrate how he was under compulsion to assassinate Amarendra Bahubali. After vanquishing the Kalakeyas, Amarendra is declared as the heir apparent to the throne while Bhallaladeva is announced as the kingdom's future commander-in-chief. Rajmata Sivagami Devi sends Amarendra on a tour under disguise with Kattappa for attaining knowledge in political affairs. During the tour, Amarendra witnesses the valour of Kuntala's Princess Devasena / Thevasenai when she resists a group of attackers. Falling in love with her, he approaches her after the fight, posing as a simpleton and Kattappa plays along with him as his uncle. Amarendra is accepted as guard at the royal palace of Kuntala while Bhallaladeva perceives about Amarendra's acts and upon viewing Devasena's portrait, lusts for her and acquires a promise from Shivagami, who assures Bhallaladeva's marriage with Devasena oblivious to the fact that Amarendra has already fallen in love with her. Shivagami sends an emissary to Kuntala proposing marriage but the emissary portrays it in a patronizing way leaving Devasena enraged. She gives a scathing reply rejecting the proposal and upon receiving her response, Shivagami sends an order to Amarendra that Devasena be brought to Mahishmati as a captive.

In Kuntala, an attack by Pindari dacoits on the royal palace exposes Amarendra and Kattappa's bravery and they nullify the attack with assistance from Devasena's maternal cousin Kumara Varma who overcomes his cowardice. Upon being confronted when Amarendra receives a message to capture Devasena, Kattappa reveals that Amarendra is the future king of Mahishmati. Amarendra, promising Devasena that he would protect her honour at any cost takes her to Mahishmati. In the court, the misunderstanding is brought to light and Shivagami asks Amarendra to choose between the throne and Devasena. Unwilling to break his promise to the princess, he chooses to marry her and serve the kingdom as its commander-in-chief. Bhallaladeva's coronation takes place at a grand note but he seethes with jealousy over his popularity among citizens. Devasena expects a child and during her baby shower, Bhallaladeva deprives Amarendra of his commander post under pretext of making sure that Amarendra spends most of his time with his pregnant wife and the post is offered to Sethupathi. Devasena questions the decision, declaring it unfair and confronts Shivagami for her inactions. She asks Amarendra to ascend the throne as a gift to her that leaves everyone stunned.

Devasena, during her visit to a temple cuts Sethupathi's fingers off with a dagger when he dares to misbehave with visiting women and her. She is shackled and produced in the court where Amarendra beheads Sethupathi for his misdeeds and as a result, both Devasena and Amarendra are banished from royal palace and are supposed to live as commoners. As Amarendra's fame does not decrease, Bijjaladeva and Bhallaladeva stage a conspiracy to further turn Shivagami against Amarendra. Bijjaladeva convinces Kumara Varma that Amarendra, Devasena and their unborn baby's lives shall be threatened by Bhallaladeva's machinations and manipulates him into entering the palace at stealth of night for assassinating Bhallaladeva to do good. However, Kumara Varma and his companions are defeated and killed before which Kumara Varma learns that it is a conspiracy to have Shivagami pass an order to assassinate Amarendra. Shivagami, who believes that Kumara Varma is sent by Amarendra for murdering Bhallaladeva secretly passes an order to Kattappa for assassinating Amarendra as declaring it publicly would lead to an internal war.

Destined to be bound to the kingdom, Kattappa helplessly lures Amarendra into a secluded place feigning that he is in trouble where Amarendra is backstabbed and killed. Kattappa is made aware of Bhallaladeva's treachery and exposes it to Shivagami, who regrets while Devasena delivers a male child. Shivagami declares to the panicked hordes outside the palace that Amarendra died and his son Mahendra Baahubali would ascend the throne. She orders an assembly to punish Bhallaladeva and his father but as Bhallaladeva and his men are about to seize Shivagami, she flees with the new King but falls into a river after being hit by an arrow shot by Bhallaladeva which leads her to a passage that ends down the mountain. Bhallaladeva becomes a tyrannical emperor who holds Devasena prisoner for the next 25 years and destroys Kuntala, Mahendra ends up in alliance with the rebels who try to rescue her. After listening to the whole story, Mahendra Baahubali (alias Shivudu / Shiva) immediately declares war. He assembles the rebel army, consisting of villagers and scattered soldiers.

With Kattappa's and Avantika's assistance, the army lays siege to Mahishmati. Bhallaladeva recaptures Devasena, but Kattappa, Mahendra, and the rebels breach the city walls and save her. Mahendra fights his uncle and pins him down using the chains from Devasena's cage. After completing a cleansing ritual, Devasena burns Bhallaladeva on a pyre, ending his reign permanently. The next day, Mahendra is crowned as the new king of Mahishmati with Avantika as his queen. He declares Mahishmati will be dedicated to upholding peace and justice under his leadership. He also orders his men to toss the head of Bhallaladeva's statue out of the palace walls, where it is swept to the great waterfall. It breaks as it falls and crashes against the cliff's walls and lands near the lingam that Mahendra carried earlier.